Usher, A., (2018). The State of Post-Secondary Education in Canada, 
2018. Toronto: Higher Education Strategy Associates. 
  
1.1  Defining the Post-Secondary Sectors 
Post-secondary education is very broadly defined in Canada.  Traditionally, we think of the system as consisting of organizations called "universities" and "community colleges", but these definitions are no longer so tidy.  New hybrid organizations, usually referred to as polytechnics, have evolved out of the college system to become a distinct part of the institutional landscape. The term "post-secondary" also includes a system of apprenticeships, which is quite unlike its European counterparts in both its structure and its target population.  Additionally, a reasonably large private vocational schools sector provides certifications, mostly for short training programs of less than 12 months' duration.  This chapter provides a detailed overview of the sector's main components. 

1.1.a   What is a university? 
Most of the earliest universities in Canada were denominational institutions, designed to provide either religious education for future clerics or religiously-inspired education for future primary/secondary school teachers.  State funding for universities began in the nineteenth century, but that funding did not really become a formal annual expenditure in most provinces until the Second World War.  Formula funding — that is, stable and predictable amounts given to universities based on objective characteristics like student numbers — dates only from the late 1960s or early 1970s. 
Universities in Canada follow the global standard Bachelor's – Master's – Doctorate procession. The typical length of a bachelor's degree program is four years except in Quebec, where it is three.  Most professional programs (medicine, dentistry, law) are technically undergraduate programs but are usually considered "second-entry" bachelor's programs, to be started only after one's first bachelor program has finished.  Quebec is a partial exception in that some spots in these programs are reserved for students entering directly from CEGEP (see below, colleges). 
There is no standard definition of what constitutes a university in Canada.  
Each province has legislation defining the use of the term, but these vary considerably in their stringency. 
Membership in Universities Canada, the country's peak representative body for universities, is often seen as an "unofficial" form of national accreditation, though the organization itself distances itself from such claims.    

Because of this definitional vagueness, it is difficult to come to a standard count of universities in Canada.  Universities Canada has 97 members, but it excludes a number of institutions which call themselves universities (e.g. Tyndale University, Quest University — 
see below, nonstandard universities) but includes a number of degree-granting bodies which are federated with other institutions (e.g. Huron College/Western University, Trinity College/University of Toronto).  Complicating matters is the Université du Quebec system, which consists of ten separate post-secondary institutions, as well as a number of institutions, such as the University of New Brunswick and the University of British Columbia, which have multiple campuses but are not usually described as "systems".  The most restrictive definition — provincially-funded institutions reporting to a single President and not in a federated arrangement with a larger institution would produce a count of 64 institutions, but other definitions could produce counts of up to 120 or so.  

Until the late 1980s, universities had a monopoly on the delivery of bachelor's degrees in Canada, and they still do in Quebec and the four Atlantic provinces.   Over the past 30 years, the Governments of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario have begun to allow some colleges to deliver degrees as well, sometimes to widen access to the four-year degree, and sometimes simply to promote more competition in the post-secondary sector.  Some of these institutions have since become universities in their own right (e.g. Vancouver Island University, Mount Royal University); of the remainder, a good number have begun to style themselves as "polytechnics" (see below).  Universities do, however, maintain a monopoly over graduate education and basic research, though colleges and polytechnics have begun to carve out their own niches in applied research. 

Canada has no official university typology.  However, while Canadian universities come in a variety of shapes and sizes, they do tend to converge on a number of "types".  Firstly, there are the large research universities with medical schools.  There are fourteen of these, and they make up nearly all of what is known as the "U-15" group.* There are also a large number of small, non-research-intensive institutions, including a number of denominational universities (e.g. Redeemer), art schools (e.g. Nova Scotia College of Art and Design), the "Maple League" of Liberal Arts Colleges (e.g. Bishop's, Mount Allison, St. Francis Xavier and Acadia), or institutions that serve small cities and associated rural areas (e.g. University of Northern British Columbia, University of Prince Edward Island, Brandon University).  In between, there are many institutions ranging in enrolment from about 5,000 to 50,000 which are usually given the label of "comprehensive" universities.  The smaller ones (e.g. Trent University) resemble liberal arts colleges in their focus on undergraduate instruction while the larger ones (e.g. Guelph, Simon Fraser) are, on some counts, more research intensive than some members of the U-15.   

By international standards, Canadian universities are relatively autonomous from governments.  Though some of the country's older institutions have governing boards which are entirely independent of provincial governments, most Canadian universities do have some government appointees on their boards.  That said, these governors tend not to "take direction" from government and it is rare that a government tries to get its appointees to follow a particular line on a specific issue.  Provincial governments are more inclined to steer 
institutions through the power of the purse; for a variety of historical reasons, governments' inclination to engage in detail grows as one goes further west across the country.   

Boards are mainly responsible for universities' financial affairs, as well as selecting Presidents and monitoring/evaluating their performance (notably, Laval and Sherbrooke are exceptions in that their Presidents are elected through an electoral college of internal stakeholders).  In academic matters, universities are governed by bodies which are usually known as Senates (though they sometimes go by other names, such as Faculty Councils).  Elected academics usually make up a majority on these bodies, though elected students and various administrators sitting ex-officio can take up a large proportion of seats.  A very few universities have a "tricameral" system which also includes a body made up of elected alumni; the University of Toronto is unique in having a unicameral system consisting of a singular Governing Council which acts as both Board and Senate.

*The fifteenth is the University of Waterloo, which is very strong in Math and Engineering but has no medical school; there are also universities, such as Sherbrooke, with medical schools which are not part of the U-15 and are not viewed as a research university.

1.1.b Non-Standard Universities
When the term "university" is used in Canada, it generally refers to stand-alone public institutions. But many institutions in Canada do not fit that definition and yet either use the term "university" themselves or are classified as such by others. Broadly, these fit into one of five categories:

Affiliated Colleges: There are a large number of small, usually denominational, colleges which have federation agreements with larger, public institutions. The majority of these are in Ontario; in many cases, the colleges are older than the public institution with which they are affiliated. When Ontario finally agreed to publicly finance higher education on a large scale in the 1950s, it did so on the understanding it would not finance religious institutions, which at the time far outnumbered the non-denominational schools. For example, Laurentian University has Thornloe (Anglican), Huntingdon (United) and Sudbury (Catholic) Universities, and Assumption University is a federated body of the University of Windsor. Outside Ontario, we see similar arrangements at places like the University of Manitoba, which has St. Paul's (Catholic) and St. John's (Anglican) Colleges, and the University of Regina, which has two religious federated colleges (Campion and Luther) as well as an affiliation with the First Nations University of Canada. Occasionally, universities have minority-language associated colleges, such as St. Boniface at the University of Manitoba or Glendon at York University.

Stand-alone religious institutions: While many religious institutions sought arrangements with public universities, others did not. Some of these have membership in Universities Canada, such as Trinity Western University in British Columbia, King's and Concordia Universities in Alberta, and Canadian Mennonite University in Winnipeg. A few have degree-granting powers but stay outside Universities Canada, such as the St. Stephen's University in New Brunswick, Tyndale University in Toronto and Burman University in Alberta. 

Private non-denominational universities: There are very few of these. Quest University in British Columbia is perhaps the best known of this type, due to its rather unique blockbased programming orientated around a single degree. This group also includes the business-orientated Canada University West in Vancouver, as well as the multi-campus Yorkville University and the online University of Fredericton in New Brunswick.

Indigenous institutions: Across Canada there are roughly 50 institutions, mostly in Western Canada, which provide post-secondary education specifically for Indigenous peoples. The funding arrangements for these institutions vary by province. With only one or two exceptions, they are not degree-granting institutions; to a large extent they serve as delivery platforms for programs established by a mainstream institution. 

Offshore institutions: Canada has had a few foreign universities set up shop in Canada, but they often do not last very long. Charles Sturt University of Australia, for instance, offered teacher education programs at a campus in Brampton for about a decade before closing in 2016. Currently, the New York Institute of Technology and Farleigh Dickinson University both have campuses in Vancouver, while Northeastern University recently opened a campus in Toronto.

1.1.b   What is a college? 
Vocational education in Canada has a long history, but most publicly-funded postsecondary vocational education dates from the 1960s.  Colleges are the most heterogenous part of the Canadian educational system: The institutions which go by this name vary significantly in nature from one end of the country to the other.

The "classic" form of community college delivers mostly vocational/trades programs to primarily mature students (i.e. not direct-from high school) in 2-year programs. At one point, this was the dominant form of community college in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario and the four Atlantic provinces.  Over time, as the economy has become more service-driven, the offerings of colleges have become white-collar orientated.  They remain focused on professional education leading directly to careers, but increasingly, these careers are in health care, technology and business. With a more professional orientation has come an increase in program length (Ontario college programs are now mostly three years) and, outside the Atlantic provinces, an increase in the provision of actual degrees as well.  Over time, Ontario has drifted the most from the "classic" model of colleges, the Atlantic colleges the least. 

Alberta and British Columbia always had a slightly different model for community colleges, one which was much closer to the American model of "junior colleges". In these two provinces, community colleges had professional orientations like those in the other seven majorityanglophone provinces. However, in addition, they also had a university-transfer function.  Both provinces initially were very cautious about expanding universities and so kept it concentrated to just two (Alberta) or three (B.C.) institutions, with students from outside the urban centres doing the first two years at regional colleges before transferring to the universities. Since the turn of the century, both provinces have been expanding their university systems (British Columbia more so than Alberta), and so the university-transfer aspect of colleges has eroded somewhat.  Yet because of the transfer mission, both Alberta and British Columbia have extensive inter-institutional credit-transfer arrangements not replicated anywhere else in the country. 

Quebec's college system is quite different from those in the rest of the country. Quebec has only five years of secondary school compared to six in the rest of the country (regular leaving age is 16 or 17 rather than 17 or 18). Students may then attend a College d'enseignement général et professionel (CEGEP) for two years.  As in Alberta and British Columbia, there are two streams — a vocational/professional one which leads to the labour market, and a general one which ends with the awarding of a diplôme d'études collégiales (DEC), which is a necessary prerequisite to attend university. This model made a great deal of sense 50 years ago when the province's small post-secondary system was mostly composed of Catholic "Collèges classique" offering education that was more rigorous than secondary education but less so than a full degree.  During Quebec's Quiet Revolution of the 1960s, these religious colleges chose the college route, except for Bishop's, which converted to university status.  It is not clear if this is a model anyone would adopt deliberately today, mostly because it is not clear that there is much call for an intermediate non-vocational credential between secondary school university. Nevertheless, Quebec's current system is so entrenched that it will almost certainly survive through inertia alone.

There are over 200 community colleges across Canada, all told. Colleges tend to have greater responsibility for ensuring access than do universities; most are open-access, and they are more likely to be located in rural and remote parts of the country.  
Indigenous peoples are more likely to be found at colleges than at universities.  Colleges also tend to be smaller; there are only a dozen or so community colleges with more than 10,000 students. From a governance perspective, colleges are often under tighter government control than universities (indeed, in several provinces, colleges were departments of government until the 1990s).  Their Boards contain more members directly appointed from government and they tend to have less freedom to independently innovate in programming.  In Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Saskatchewan there are single "systems" of college education. On the labour side, college employees tend to be unionized at the provincial rather than the institutional level, meaning there is sector-wide bargaining in colleges (whereas with universities it is usually one institution at a time). 

1.1.c Who controls "degree-granting authority"?
Universities, by definition, have authority to grant degrees. But in many parts of the country, so too do other organizations, including private institutions and community colleges. How did these bodies become degree-granting? The power to authorize the granting of degrees rests with the various provincial ministers of advanced education. In nearly all provinces, there is enshrined in legislation a process by which institutions — be they community colleges or private institutions — can apply to offer degrees. Interested institutions must apply separately for each degree they wish to offer. Processes exist for dedicated arms-length organizations (such as Ontario's Post-Secondary Education Quality Assessment Board, Campus Alberta, and BCcampus) to evaluate whether the institution has the financial and human resources to offer the degree. If this is the first time an institution has made a request, there is usually a separate inquiry made into the suitability of the institution itself and its promoters. While the dedicated organizations evaluate the proposals, their role is only advisory: Ministers retain the final power to decide the merits of any given proposal. In practice, the recommendations of the arms-length organizations are accepted in the majority of cases.

1.1.d   What is a polytechnic? 
The term "polytechnic" has a number of uses around the world.  In France, it refers to one specific elite Engineering school.  In the United Kingdom (up until 1992), it referred to a kind of junior college, offering university-style programming, but not permitted to issue degrees.  It meant something similar in New Zealand for a long time, though recently those polytechnics have come to have much more professional and technical foci as well.  In Finland, polytechnics (technically "ammattikorkeakoulu") are also known as "Universities of Applied Sciences", and while they focus on practical and professionally-oriented education, they also engage in applied research and issue both bachelor's and master's degrees. 

In Canada, the term polytechnic does not have a legal meaning, outside the province of Alberta where the term refers to two specific technical institutions. However, as some Canadian community colleges — mainly the large ones from Ontario westward — have become more professionally-oriented and technologically sophisticated, increased their involvement in applied research and begun teaching bachelor's level programs, there has been a move on the part of some of these institutions to rebrand themselves with the term "polytechnic" and band together to lobby at the federal level under the banner "Polytechnics Canada". However, most Polytechnics Canada members also remain members of Colleges and Institutes Canada, the peak representative body for community colleges. 

Prior to the adoption of the term "Polytechnic" about a decade ago, the last major institution to carry this label was Ryerson Polytechnic, which transformed into a university in the early 1990s. For this reason, the move by some institutions to adopt the polytechnics moniker is seen in some quarters as evidence that these institutions are simply colleges which want to become universities. In one or two cases that is clearly true: Sheridan College, a Torontoarea member of Polytechnics Canada, has been quite open in seeking university status and Kwantlen Polytechnic University has already achieved it.  Others, have decided to turn down university status when offered (for example, the British Columbia Institute of Technology) and many major colleges, like Humber and Seneca, seem focused on forging an independent identity.  

1.1.e   Apprenticeships
Apprenticeships in Canada are a form of post-secondary education where learners combine periods in the workforce under the supervision of experienced tradespeople with periods of in-class study which occurs mainly, but not exclusively, in community colleges. 

Technically, apprentices are not "students" and do not show up as such in enrolment statistics. Rather, they are employees who have signed specific apprenticeship contracts with employers and who periodically attend courses. Apprenticeships are organized by trade, and most trades are of the traditional vocational variety, particularly those related to housing, construction, automobile, and food industries. In the last decade, there have been various attempts to bring apprenticeships to other, more service-oriented occupations (mainly: aestheticians, early childhood educators and IT service professionals), with mixed results.  Though efforts have been made to increase apprenticeship options in secondary schools, in the main apprentices in Canada tend to be in their early-to-mid 20s.   

Apprentices pass through various "levels" before certification as journeypersons.  The number of levels, as well as the number of work hours and weeks of in-class training, may vary by level, trade, and province.  Broadly speaking, most of the major trades have four levels that require one year each to complete.  Finishing the final level and passing the relevant exams entitles the individual to a provincial trades certificate; to work outside the province, individuals must complete a second set of tests known as "Red Seal Exams". In international context, Canadian apprenticeships are outliers for a variety of reasons.  The first is that they are considered post-secondary rather than a part of the secondary education system (hence the relatively advanced age of its apprentices).  The second is the length of the programs (typically four years compared to two in most of Europe).  The third is the release system for theoretical in-class training. Most countries use a day-release system which sees apprentices spend 3-4 days a week at work and 1-2 in class. While this is not unknown in Canada, but much more common is the "block release" system which sees apprentices work for 35-40 weeks at a time and then go to class for blocks of 8-12 weeks.  The final reason is the relatively limited number of occupations for which apprenticeships are available. 

1.1.f   Private Vocational Colleges
The final element of Canada's post-secondary education system is the private, mainly forprofit, vocational colleges.  
These resemble the private for-profit sector in the United States except they focus almost exclusively on programs of one year or less rather than degree-level programming. They are quite common in certain fields which are not covered at community colleges, such as music production, aesthetician training, and dental assisting, but they also offer some relatively advanced IT training as well.  Language schools are another large sector, though they mainly focus on students from outside Canada.  Because they operate without subsidy, their programs tend to be significantly more expensive than those of community colleges; on the other hand, because they operate on a continuous-intake basis, they offer students more convenience than institutions whose only intakes arein September and January. There are several hundred of these institutions registered across Canada.  Most are small, independent businesses, but a substantial portion of students are enrolled at large, chain institutions such as triOS or CDI, which tend to have a business or IT focus. 

1.2  Federalism and Post-Secondary Education: Who Funds What? 
A basic tension in the Canadian Confederation debates of the 1860s was how to create a system of representation by population, which also guaranteed to Catholic, francophone Quebec the ability to maintain control over crucial cultural institutions — in particular educational ones. The eventual solution was a federal system with a federal government elected through a rough representation by population, but with responsibility for education (among other things) vested firmly at the provincial level.  This compromise is enshrined very specifically in s. 93 of the Canadian Constitution, which allocates responsibility for post-secondary institutions and their funding to the provinces.  This in why Canada effectively has ten provincial systems of post-secondary education rather than a single national one. 

Though operating funds (which includes both provincial government funding and tuition fees) are exclusively provincial in nature, the federal government contributes to the higher education sector in three ways: through transfer payments to provinces, support for scientific research, and various forms of student assistance. 

The federal government transfers funds to provincial governments in two ways: first, through equalization payments designed to allow poorer provinces to provide services at levels similar to richer ones and second, through per-capita payments via the Canada Health Transfer and the Canada Social Transfer.  These transfer programs originated in the 1940s, when the federal government "borrowed" tax room from provinces to pay for the war effort, and they continued in the 1950s/60s when the government began to use these tax revenues to pay provinces for the development of what we now know as our social safety net.  Roughly 30% of the Canada Social Transfer is theoretically allocated to post-secondary education; however, since there is no way to track federal funds once they are in provincial coffers, 
this allocation is purely notional.  In total the $3.5 billion or so from this source would account for only about 6% of total institutional revenue in Canadian PSE. Further details about these arrangements may be found in chapter five.

Funding for scientific research at universities began around World War I, it but only became a major source of institutional funding during the 1970s.  For many years, this funding was directed not to institutions, but to individual researchers (or groups thereof) through the granting councils.  From the early 1990s onwards, however, there has been a gradual move towards funding research at an institutional level, first through the Network Centres of Excellence, then through the Canada Foundation for Innovation (which funds research infrastructure) and most recently through the Canada First Research Excellence Fund.  Some provinces also fund research separately (notably Quebec), but the main sources of funding lie in Ottawa. 

Student assistance in Canada takes various forms (see chapter 6), but both provinces and the federal government contribute to students' education through loans, grants and tax credits. In addition, the federal government spends over $1 billion per year in educational savings incentives. 

In addition to the above, there is funding for capital, which tends to be erratic and come in bursts, often in the form of "stimulus" programs in times of economic downturn.  Increasingly, outside Quebec at least, provincial governments are relying on occasional federal government spending sprees to take care of capital funding, though institutional fund-raising is also rising in importance as a source of capital funds.
