A Study of Community College Faculty Work Expectations: Generous Educators and Their Managed Generosity by Stephanie Aguilar-Smith and Leslie D. Gonzales 

ABSTRACT 
In this multi-method qualitative study, which included faculty and administrator interviews as well as a systematic analysis of organizational documents, we sought to understand the expectations placed upon and taken up by community college faculty. Our analysis suggests that the overarching expectation of community college faculty is to serve as generous educators.However, despite seeming consensus across data sources, we found that faculty and administrators often held discrepant views as to how faculty should carry out this role. Whereas most community college faculty relationally and holistically conceived of their work, administrators generally favored instrumental and bureaucratic techniques, leading us to argue that the generosity of these educators is highly managed. Similar to earlier writing on managed professionals, we found that administrators expected faculty to entrust their efforts to care for students to bureaucratic devices, although faculty often considered such systems ineffective. Ultimately, we assert that the instrumental framing of community college faculty work expectations adversely affects not just faculty but students, and we offer recommendations for community college leaders and faculty development offices. 
The community college sector enrolls about half of all U.S. undergraduate students and a large proportion of historically underserved students (e.g., racially/ethnically minoritized, disabled, first-generation, non-traditionally aged, working-class, and veteran students) (Goldrick-Rab, 2016;Ma& Baum, 2016; Shapiro et al., 2017). Teaching this highly diverse and sizeable student population are about 350,000 community college faculty members (National Center for Education Statistics, 2017), the majority (over 80%) of whom hold contingent appointments, meaning non-tenure-track and potentially part-time positions (U.S. Governmental Accountability Office, 2017).1 <BR>Although community colleges have long relied on a contingent labor force (Gappa & Leslie, 1993), the tendency to hire contingent and/or part-time professors became more pronounced when substantial numbers of faculty retired in the early 2000s (Twombly, 2005). Amid the growing dominance of contingent faculty appointments, this sector has also navigated increasing pressures related to reduced state funding and volatile student enrollments (Phelan, 2014; Romano & Palmer, 2016), which, in turn, has led many community colleges to adopt web-based or web-enhanced advising, online courses, and more flexible scheduling options (Garza-Mitchell, 2009; Gonzales & Terosky, 2016), so as to meet student needs and interests. Concerned about the implications of these multiple shifts, some researchers have examined if and how faculty contingency connects to student learning (see Jaeger & Eagan, 2009; Kezar & Maxey, 2014). Meanwhile, other researchers have considered how these shifts threaten the overall wellbeing of the academic profession (see Gappa & Leslie, 1993; Rhoades, 2017; Street, Maisto, Merves, & Rhoades, 2012). For example, Rhoades (2017) found that contingent hires not only lacked long-term job security and basic employment benefits but also that administrators often hired part-time faculty on a last-minute basis without consulting existing faculty. Additionally, community colleges frequently exclude contingent faculty from governance affairs, which means a shrinking pool of full-time professors must now address growing demands around accountability, curriculum, and other student needs (Center for Community College Student Engagement, 2014). 
Despite the significant shifts within this sector, including those related to the composition and workload of the community college professoriate, scholars rarely explore community colleges as academic workplaces (Braxton, Doyle, & Lyken-Segosebe, 2015; Grubb & Worthen, 1999; Ward & Wolf-Wendel, 2017 <BR>are exceptions). Instead, most depictions of the community college professorial role assume a rather settled, or uncontested, and unidimensional view of community college faculty work – one suggesting that their work exclusively focuses on teaching. However, given the multiple shifting dynamics within this sector and amongst community college faculty, as well as the lack of literature that explores community colleges as academic workplaces, we asked the following research questions: 

(1) What expectations are placed upon and taken up by community college faculty? 

(2) Do faculty, administrators, and organizations report similar or divergent expectations? 

To set up our paper, we first review how the distinctive history of community colleges in the United States informs the conception of faculty work in this sector.

Situating community college faculty work 
Some scholars generously describe community colleges as a democratizing force in U.S. higher education (Cohen, Brawer, & Kisker, 2013), while others argue that community colleges divert working-class, racially/ethnically minoritized, and other marginalized students away from opportunities afforded by elite universities (Brint & Karabel, 1989). Whether one historicizes community colleges as points of democratization or diversion, there is no doubt that these institutions’ unique position in the U.S. hierarchical system of higher education has shaped the real and perceived nature of faculty work in this sector (Ayers, 2015; Brint & Karabel, 1989; Gonzales, 2013; Grubb & Worthen, 1999). Indeed, the historical record shows that early community college leaders often emphasized technical or vocational education, seeking to direct marginalized students toward technical labor market needs (Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Brint & Karabel, 1989). However, the record also shows that most community college students desired an academic experience that would prepare them to transfer to a four-year university (Brint & Karabel, 1989). These competing visions led community colleges to offer both general/transfer education and vocational education. To this point, researchers have found that vocationalism is central to the community college mission and serves as an orienting logic for faculty (Finley & Kinslow, 2016; Gumport, 2003). For instance, in reviewing community college mission statements, Ayers (2015) discovered that references to workforce preparation were not only common but have recently become more globally oriented and more prone to emphasize credential completion. As the sector evolved, community colleges also started offering continuing education programs such as English language classes, developmental (or remedial) education courses, (Burns, 2017; Cox, 2010; Grubb & Worthen, 1999), and community service initiatives, especially efforts connected to local business (Yarnall, 2014), so as to adequately meet the varied needs and interests of students and nearby community members. 
The multi-pronged mission of the community college sector has, of course, influenced the nature and conceptualization of community college faculty work (Cohen et al., 2013; Twombly & Townsend, 2008). Specifically, given community colleges’ foci on general/transfer, vocational, and developmental education, researchers generally assume that the work of community college professors is limited to teaching. Moreover, only recently have researchers started to address the changing nature of instruction and pressures for more diverse forms of course delivery (e.g. hybrid courses, online education). For instance, Garza-Mitchell (2009) studied the impact of online education in community colleges, discovering that beyond structural and procedural changes, online education expanded the roles of both faculty and administrators. Few studies, however, explore non-teaching related aspects of community college faculty work. A couple of exceptions include Gibson and Murray (2009)and Lester (2009) who investigated the service responsibilities of community college faculty. Both studies found that women faculty tended to sacrifice activities like professional development and scholarly interests to complete their service and teaching duties. However, neither study examined how much service was actually expected of faculty nor if and how service responsibilities differed across appointment types or at different career stages. 
Additionally, a small pool of scholars has considered if, how, why, and to what end community college faculty conduct research (Braxton et al., 2015; Cejda & Hensel, 2009). For example, Sperling (2003) assessed if community college faculty followed Boyer’s(1990) call to define and conduct scholarship according to institutional type. Boyer, President of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, encouraged colleges and universities to align their notions of scholarship with their institutional missions, thereby enabling faculty across all institutional types to be rewarded for conducting research relevant to their employing institution’s mission. Thus, according to Boyer, given community colleges’ teaching-forward mission, faculty in this sector should conduct and be rewarded for teaching-related scholarship. Through an embedded case study, Sperling found that community college faculty took a long time to appreciate potential connections between theory, research, and the classroom, and an even longer time to infuse “applied research into their teaching” (2003, p. 594). However, Sperling did not establish whether or not the employing community college actually expected its professors to conduct teaching-related scholarship. Years later, Terosky and Gonzales (2016) interviewed community college faculty at two sites and determined that they engaged in two primary forms of research-related activities: classroom-based research (e.g., enacting minor interventions and then studying their effects) and scholarly learning (e.g., participating in reading groups to update their knowledge base for teaching). Terosky and Gonzales (2016) also uncovered that these research-related activities were not part of these community college faculty members’ work expectations, but self-driven actions. However, Cejda and Hensel (2009), Braxton et al. (2015), Martinez (2018), and Palmer (2015) all make the case that community college faculty increasingly engage in research activities, particularly applied or action-based research, both because they want to and because it is expected of them. 
In sum, the history of community colleges as vocationally-oriented, teaching-focused institutions has, perhaps, limited how researchers have framed and studied faculty work in this sector. Although the work of community college faculty remains heavily teaching-oriented, recent research suggests it also includes other understudied elements such as research and service activities. Thus, there is merit in studying the expectations of community college faculty. To do so, we combined workplace studies with literature on the academic profession to form our conceptual framework. 

Conceptual framework 
Workplace studies document how organizations foster the conditions of and infrastructure for work, as well as how employees experience, understand, and leverage or ignore those conditions and infrastructure (Sellberg & Lindblom, 2014). Workplace researchers also consider various and potentially conflicting views to understand the full scope of a workplace or a workplace subject matter such as the expectations of a position. In short, both employees and work settings deeply shape and define the nature of workplace research. Thus, for the basis of our study, we blended literature on faculty socialization and work with workplace studies. 

Studying the work of community college faculty 
In a study concerned with the work expectations placed upon and taken up by community college faculty, it is critical to note that faculty are not typical employees but members of a profession and, thus, professionals, which Hermanowicz (2011) describes as follows: 
A profession is a type of occupation that possesses, in greater or lesser degrees, specific characteristics: Abstract, theoretic knowledge; restricted access; protracted training; certification; a license and mandate; trust and authority; a code of ethics; altruism; and autonomy – these are the hallmarks that socially differentiate types of work and workers along a professional continuum. (p. vi) 
Given Hermanowicz’s conceptualization, community college faculty qualify as professionals for a few key reasons. For one, community college faculty, particularly those who teach general education courses, must hold at least a master’s degree (Cohen et al., 2013). Indeed, an increasing number of these faculty now hold doctoral degrees (Finley & Kinslow, 2016; Martinez, 2018; Savoy & Hill, 2018), which means that, on the whole, community college professors represent a uniquely educated and small portion of the entire working adult population in the United States. Second, community college faculty, particularly those with tenure-track or permanent appointments, participate in searching, screening, and recommending faculty candidates for hire, and therefore, they hold substantial authority over who accesses the occupation or, better said, the academic profession. Third, typically, community college faculty, especially those again in permanent positions, also repeatedly evaluate their colleagues (e.g., teaching observations, peer review processes, promotion) and, thus, significantly govern their peers’ career trajectories. However, as alluded to in the introduction, the professional status of the community college professoriate and of faculty, more generally, has considerably eroded since the 1970s, especially depreciating in the last couple of decades. Highlighting this professional erosion, for example, is this sector’s mounting reliance on contingent part-time faculty (Twombly, 2005), as well as administrators’ increasing propensity to more or less unilaterally fill these contingent appointments on a just-in-time basis without actively consulting faculty (Rhoades, 2015). This latter trend, in particular, compromises the professional status of the community college professoriate. 
Given these ongoing trends, faculty members have come to be understood as managed professionals (Rhoades, 1998, 2011). More specifically, Rhoades explained that the declining support and resources to public colleges and universities expanded managerial oversight and power and, thus, constrained faculty authority. In understanding community college faculty as managed professionals, we are simultaneously mindful of strong professionalization forces such as graduate school training (Austin & McDaniels, 2006; Gardner, 2010), as well as of the profound influence of deans and program directors, which Rhoades describes as managerial professionals, whom have come to predominate in the contemporary neoliberal context. With this mind, workplace studies provide a robust framework for identifying how employees – in this case how community college faculty – may learn or take on the expectations of their work. 

Job seeking and hiring 
When searching and starting new jobs, faculty have plenty of opportunities to learn more about the expectations of their work. For instance, graduate students often consult with their advisors (Barnes, Williams, & Archer, 2010) and garner information from professional or disciplinary associations (Gonzales, 2014) about the general nature of faculty work. Workplace researchers, however, are acutely interested in organizational agency or in how organizations express expectations to potential hires. For example, a workplace researcher may focus on the messaging a hiring organization uses to communicate who it is and what it searches for in prospective employees (Stensaker, 2015). From this perspective, colleges and universities define and maintain, in part, the characteristics of their respective sector when they design job descriptions and set hiring criteria (Abelman & Dalessandro, 2008; Clark, 1978; Morphew & Hartley, 2006). Chen (2018) agreed with this idea, noting that some of the most salient organizational messaging come in the form of “mission statements, positions, written rules and standard operating procedures, and [that] organizational histories provide guidelines on what (or, more often, what not)todo”(p. 37, italics in original). 
Although the search, screening, and hiring process varies across institutions, faculty searches often entail multiple rounds of review coordinated by a slate of potential faculty colleagues and administrators (Turner, 2002; Twombly, 2005), who explain to prospective hires how their work would fit within the larger organization and its mission. Put simply, the multiple touch-points within the interview process allow prospective faculty to learn about the formal expectations of the job. Thus, it is sensible to consider what job descriptions, mission statements, and faculty hiring processes communicate about work expectations (Twombly, 2005). 

Organizational socialization efforts 
Once hired, community college faculty experience various sources of formal socialization, including onboarding programs, evaluation processes and, of course, messaging from supervisors, or what Rhoades (1998) calls managerial professionals (Dallimore, 2003; Lester, 2008, 2009; Tierney & Bensimon, 1996; Trowler & Knight, 2000). Although these formal socialization efforts are impactful, workplace researchers stress the powerful socialization role of mundane interactions. For example, organizational newcomers observe seasoned colleagues to learn unspoken norms and expectations (Filstad, 2004). Moreover, Cawyer and Friedrich (1998) found that when newcomers’preconceived expectations fail, they seek advice from colleagues before turning to formal policy, thereby making it sensible to ask faculty and administrators to share their expectations for community college faculty. Thus, to develop a fuller, albeit contested, understanding of a workplace or workplace matter, it is important to gather perspectives from multiple sources and varied angles. 

Methodology 
We employed a critical qualitative inquiry (CQI) approach in this study. According to Denzin (2017), CQI researchers work from an ethically responsible agenda that “…uses inquiry to reveal sites for change and activism …to help people; to affect social policy by getting critiques heard and acted on by policy makers …”(p. 9). Specifically, we sought to critically consider the expectations set for and taken up by community college faculty, so as to expose if and where tensions might lie and to inform community college leadership, policy, and practice in ways that advance justice in the academic workplace. 

Research design 
We carried out this work at three community colleges, pseudonymized as Midwestern Community College (MWCC), Mountain Community College (MCC), and Southwest Community College (SWCC). Although we provide basic information for each college in Appendix <BR>A, our work should not be read as case study research. Rather, we carried out this work at as many sites as we could access over a six-month period. 
These sites shared several similarities. They enrolled a large number of historically underserved and underrepresented students. MCC enrolled large numbers of Native American and Latinx students, and college officials classified 85% of SWCC’s students as Hispanic or Latinx. Although MWCC enrolled an atypically large number of multi-generation college students, it also matriculated a substantial minoritized student body and a growing refugee population. All the colleges also employed contingent faculty, but MCC and SWCC employed fewer than the national average in this sector, which hover around 70% (CCCSE, 2014), while more than 90% of MWCC’s faculty held contingent appointments. Furthermore, all sites were coping with recent funding reductions, but MCC’s financial status was the most acute due to a major downturn in the local economy. Lastly, all three colleges used: Guided Pathways, clear and educationally coherent academic roadmaps designed to support program selection and completion (Jenkins & Cho, 2013); intrusive advising, a preemptive advising approach where advisors intentionally and proactively contact students toward fostering students’ academic motivation and persistence (Varney, 2007); and various technological platforms to track and support student progress. 

Data sources 
We conducted faculty and administrator interviews, as well as analyzed organizational documents, but our primary data source was 18 semi-structured interviews (see Table <BR>1). It is important to point out that one campus was concerned about faculty confidentiality and requested that we use a binary STEM and Non-STEM schema to categorize faculty rather than disciplinary areas (e.g., biology and history). Thus, for the sake of consistency, we applied this schema to all participants. STEM includes all science, engineering, and mathematics disciplines, and non-STEM includes all humanities and social science disciplines. Concerning administrators, we refer to deans and chief academic officers as high-level administrators and department chairs and faculty developers as administrators. 
Interviewee recruitment and selection 
In terms of interviewee selection criteria, we aimed to recruit an equal number of tenure-eligible and contingent faculty of varying racial/ethnic and gender identities and across academic disciplines. We excluded vocational/technical education faculty because their employment certifications and work conditions substantially differ from those of the general education professoriate within this sector. For one, vocational faculty are typically not required to hold a master’s or doctoral degree (Higher Learning Commission, 2019) and, thus, likely do not undergo a similar socialization process to that experienced by general education faculty in graduate school. Secondly, among community college adjuncts, those in general education disciplines generally “desire the relative stability of a regular full-time academic position,” while those in vocational fields often “teach at colleges from their own reasons with more lucrative and professional fulfilling options located outside of academe” (Wagoner, 2019, p. 91). 
Table 1. Basic interviewee information by site. 
Interviewee  Position Title  Disciplinary Affiliation  
MWCC Interviewees  
Annie  Administrator, Faculty Developer  Non-STEM  
Deborah  High-level Academic Administrator  STEM  
Gina  High-level Academic Administrator  STEM  
Marsha  Faculty, Faculty Developer  STEM  
Drew  Faculty, Tenure/Permanent-Stream  Non-STEM  
Daryl  Faculty, Tenure/Permanent-Stream  STEM  
MCC Interviewees  
Amanda  High-level Academic Administrator & former  Non-STEM  
faculty development leader  
Lena  Administrator, Faculty Developer  Non-STEM  
Gregory  High-level Academic Administrator  Non-STEM  
Darlene  Faculty, Tenure/Permanent-Stream  STEM  
Dean  Faculty, Tenure/Permanent-Stream  Non-STEM  
George  Faculty, Tenure/Permanent-Stream  Non-STEM  
Rachel  Faculty, Tenure/Permanent-Stream  STEM  
Sarah  Faculty, Tenure/Permanent-Stream  STEM  
SWCC Interviewees  
Marcos  High-level Academic Administrator  STEM  
Janeth*  Faculty, Contingent  Non-STEM  
Gabriella  Faculty, Contingent  Non-STEM  
Maricela  Faculty, Faculty Developer  Non-STEM  

Table 2. Organizational documents collected for each site. 
Organizational Document/Artifact MWCC MCC SWCC 
Mission & Vision Statements ✓✓✓ Faculty Development Materials/Offerings ✓✓ Faculty Handbooks/Orientation Materials ✓✓✓ Faculty Evaluation Policies/Guidelines ✓✓✓ Faculty Job Advertisements ✓✓✓ Total (n=33) (n=26) (n=76) 
Pertaining to administrators, we focused on academic deans, department chairs, and faculty developers because the nature of these roles require them to be familiar with faculty hiring and evaluation and to be in close contact with faculty. We used public web-directories, snowball sampling, and personal contacts to identify and recruit participants. Despite an incentive, our web-based recruitment did not yield much interest; thus, we most heavily relied on snowball sampling, asking participants for names of colleagues who may be willing to participate in our study. In the end, we recruited four faculty of Color, seven White faculty, two contingent professors, nine full-time tenure-track professors, and seven administrators. 

Interviews 
All interviews ranged from 65–100 minutes and included four segments. With the first set of questions, participants recounted their specific role within the college and discussed the college’s mission and culture. Second, we asked about faculty work expectations. For example, we asked participants to describe their college’s hiring, onboarding, and promotion processes. We also inquired about informal organizational rules and norms. Our third segment of questions pertained to faculty responsibilities with regard to students. Here, we learned about the college’s student body and about systems in place intended to support faculty work with students. Fourth and lastly, we asked participants what advice they would offer future community college faculty. 
Documents and document inclusion 
We sourced organizational documents relevant to faculty work. Concerned with how faculty roles are currently, rather than historically, understood, we limited our document gathering to the years 2015–2018 (see Table <BR>2). We sourced artifacts available via public websites. Faculty development materials for SWCC could not be located and, therefore, were not a part of our analysis. 

Analytic strategy 
Our analytic process coincided with data collection. Following almost all interviews, we debriefed, noting our reactions to the interview and discussing connections across data sources and literature. As we concluded data collection, we moved into a more systematic analysis. First, we applied structural coding, meaning we highlighted parts of the transcripts addressing our research questions. Next, we re-read our highlighted sections and applied descriptive codes to these data points. Upon re-reading coded data, we bounded similar points together and formed initial themes (see Table <BR>3). 
In service of our first research question, we re-read these early themes and their constituent data points, asking: Do these themes suggest multiple or one key expectation of faculty? Ultimately, our 
Table 3. Example of codes to theme analysis. 
Similar Codes Early Themes 
Instruct a range of students; maintain high academic standards; be a non-researcher. Be teachers first. Be around; know the college; committee work; mentor peers; community outreach. Be available. Case working; show empathy; know students; advise; be a resource hub. Engage and support students. Improve efficiency; improve and grow; refresh programs. Continuously improve. 

inductively generated themes suggested one overarching expectation – community college faculty were expected to serve as generous educators, who resourcefully and compassionately taught and supported students. In terms of our second research question, we assessed if and to what extent faculty, administrators, and organizational documents similarly or differently described their expectations of community college faculty. For this, we followed Evergreen’s(2018) advice for creating a qualitative heatmap. First, we created a spreadsheet, listing our themes in the rows on the most left-hand-side of the spreadsheet. Second, we filled rows with data points corresponding to each theme. Third, we applied color-coding to differentiate data points by source (e.g., faculty, administrator, and document). 
Boundaries 
Like all studies, this work has its limitations. First, our inability to recruit more contingent faculty means we were unable to assess if and how expectations for differently appointed faculty members vary in this sector. However, we asked tenure-track/permanent faculty and administrators to share what they expected of their contingent colleagues. We also read organizational documents with this question. Second, because we only interviewed four people of Color, we were unable to deeply consider if and how expectations for faculty of Color differ (Levin, Walker, Haberler, & Jackson-Boothby, 2013). Third, due to our macroscopic approach, we were unable to delve into disciplinary differences. Lastly, because we excluded vocational faculty, we are unable to account for the work expectations of this distinct group. 

Findings 
“A really good caring professor will always, any teacher really will always, live in misery. It’s a horrible career in a sense because no matter how many students do well, you will live in anguish over the one you failed to help succeed.”–Drew, MWCC faculty member 
As a reminder, the following research questions guided our study: What expectations are placed upon and taken up by community college faculty? And, do faculty, administrators, and organizations report similar or divergent expectations? In terms of our first question, our inductive analysis of faculty, administrators, and organizational documents suggested that community college faculty should serve as generous educators who invest in quality teaching and in serving as institutional agents. In terms of question two, despite seeming consensus, we found discrepant views about how faculty were expected to realize these two main responsibilities of a generous educator. Below, we draw on our data to further define what we mean when describing community college faculty as generous educators. 

The generous educator 
We argue that the overarching expectation of community college faculty members is that they serve as generous educators. For this study, we defined generous educators as faculty who invest in teaching, student success, and the college with near boundless commitment and empathy. More specifically, based on our analysis, community college faculty were expected to invest time in understanding their students, particularly who they are and what kinds of supports they need. Generous educators were also expected to invest in their own learning so as to serve students’ ever-evolving needs. Capturing the ethos of a generous educator, Maricela, a faculty member and developer at SWCC, said: 
The community college mission is to provide an education to a specific community so that they can enhance their own lives. So, my role in that, I believe, is to encourage them to continue with school. Our students are first in their family college students, and so, they don’t really know if they can do it … I just find myself constantly telling them: You can do it. All it takes is hard work and dedication…it’s almost like parenting students. 
Although some might find Maricela’s comments bordering on patronizing, this view was widespread. For example, Darlene, a STEM faculty at MCC, said that she expects her faculty colleagues to behave as follows: 
You’re extremely helpful; you’re willing to put in the time, willing to work with a student. There’s no bad question. Just keep students comfortable in the classroom. To me, that’s big, because they’re not going to ask you anything if they’re scared to death of you. 
Darlene’s quote emphasizes the expectation that community college faculty should be prepared to patiently and empathetically work with students. Meanwhile, Rachel, Gabriella, Lena, and Amanda all noted that they have provided students their personal phone numbers to be more available. 
In addition to giving their time and support to students, all participants and many documents stressed that faculty should also invest time and energy into the college to ultimately better serve students. These data points intimated, for example, that faculty should become familiar with support services and campus on-goings in order for them to best serve students. Janeth, a SWCC faculty member, commented: 
I know for sure [the college is] looking for individuals that are not only advancing their careers professionally in their own field but also that are really committed to the community college life for students and being involved in activities and events. 
Similarly, Marsha, a faculty developer at MWCC, and Marcos, a high-level academic administrator at SWCC, both confirmed that they expected faculty, including part-time contingent faculty, to be physically present on campus to understand college on-goings and, thus, best support students. On the one hand, this finding was unsurprising to us. Faculty have historically been expected to serve college-level and departmental needs and to be a bridge between students and the broader campus. On the other hand, we were somewhat surprised that participants expected such behavior of part-time contingent faculty, given the well-established assumption that adjuncts are not expected to participate in service or organizational affairs given their part-time and often tenuous status (Haviland, Ortiz, & Henriques, 2017; Thirolf, 2017). 
All in all, as we read the various data sources, we determined that as generous educators, community college faculty should invest in quality teaching and support students by serving as institutional agents. However, we found discrepant views as to how faculty in this sector were expected to actualize these responsibilities. Below, we present these findings and highlight discord within each, pointing out when data sources align or diverge. 
The expectations of generous educators – discord is in the details 
From a faculty perspective, most people see their mission as making students’ lives better. So, whatever students perceive as [better], whether it’s transferring and gaining a 4-year degree to developmental courses … meeting them where they’re at … Idon’t know if administration and faculty have the exact same vision. I think they do, but I think it gets translated very differently between administrators and faculty – Marsha, Administrator, MWCC 

Investing in quality teaching 
Faculty and administrators all agreed that a large part of being a generous educator meant investing one’s time in class preparation and ongoing learning, as well as showing up prepared, knowledgeable, and empathetic to students’ busy and complex lives. However, a closer look at our data suggested two distinct stances as to what it meant to perform as a quality teacher. A large majority of faculty and all administrators held that to be quality instructors, faculty should build their technological, pedagogical, and classroom managerial skills. These participants were clear that quality teaching was not related to research, often framing community college faculty members as “not researchers.” Meanwhile, a minority faction of faculty elevated research, disciplinary expertise, and enthusiasm for continued learning when they described delivering quality instruction. 

The majority view 
Capturing the majority perspective was George, a non-STEM faculty member at MCC, who remarked: “Unlike a university, we’re teachers. We’re not researchers. So, [the] expectation is you’re supposed to be here to do things to help develop your students. That’s sort of at the core of what’s expected of us.” Similarly, Marsha cautioned, “Most search committees want people whose sole goal is to teach. If your focus is on research … or if you’re doing that by default, it’s like smelling blood in a search committee.” In lieu of research, the majority of participants suggested that community college faculty could and should participate in workshops focused on classroom management, active learning, and culturally relevant instructional strategies to improve their teaching. For example, Amanda, a former faculty developer at MCC who had recently assumed a higher-level administrative job, said that she encourages new faculty to “partake in all of the resources that we have for faculty … Any trainings or professional development workshops that are held in the center, Canvas training that we offer through online services…Do your Quality Matters workshops!” Furthermore, organizational documents such as a SWCC job posting stated that faculty must have experience and the ability “to incorporate technology into the classroom.” And, Lena, a faculty developer at MCC, shared her concern about faculty members’ limited to non-existent training in online instruction. Of this, she remarked, “There’s probably a lot of really talented faculty out there teaching online, but there’s also about a third of them who have not received the support and instruction they need in terms of designing and delivering a quality course.” Stressing training and skill building in a slightly different way, Gina, a high-level academic MWCC administrator, expected faculty to be creative and search for more efficient ways of managing their responsibilities. Describing what she looks for in faculty hires, she said: 
I want to know what someone will do when they don’t have the skill or the knowledge because I believe we’re constant learners. I can’t expect, first of all, that they’re going to know the system; they’re going to have to learn it. So, I want to know how somebody will engage themselves so that they can learn … and know more about the college than just what they’ve been hired for. So, I want to know that somebody has the spunk … to stretch and understand why we do what we do. And, if there’s a better way of doing what we do, I want to hear about it. 
George’s, Marsha’s, Lena’s, and Gina’s comments implied that community college faculty should invest in teaching by developing their instructional repertoire in certain ways. Specifically, this majoritarian perspective made clear that community college professors should improve their instruction by learning new technologies and classroom managerial skills, not by conducting any forms of research or by advancing their disciplinary knowledge. Indeed, these participants hardly, if ever, mentioned faculty expertise or the continued development of that expertise at all. 

The minority view 
Not opposed in principle to the benefits of technology or learning classroom managerial skills, a small number of participants (two faculty members and one administrator) and a few organizational documents maintained that quality teaching required faculty to invest in their learning by extending and updating their disciplinary knowledge, which is similar to Neumann’s(2009) notion “scholarly learning” (p. 43). Data points in the minority view represented a more discipline-forward conceptualization of what it means to serve as a quality instructor. These participants explained that faculty should stay abreast of developments in their respective fields by attending disciplinary conferences and reading recent studies to refresh their content expertise and course syllabi. For example, Rachel, a STEM faculty member at MCC, shared that she incorporated research into her work with students, particularly since many of her students aspired to attend medical school. Dean, a non-STEM faculty member at MCC, also captured the minority view, excitedly saying: 

S. AGUILAR-SMITH AND L. D. GONZALES 
I hope … students leave here believing that [discipline] is just the coolest thing … They’re going to be pumping their fists and feeling like they’ve been shown somewhat of the holy grail explanation of the universe. [To do this], I want to make sure that I’m staying current on [my field and instructional practices] because we’ve got a new kind of student. 
Although nearly all administrators did not support Dean’s comments, MCC’s faculty evaluation guidelines delineated sample research projects that faculty should consider when seeking recognition as a distinguished chair. One such option was “Action research by one or more instructors to improve instructional practices.” Moreover, an MCC job posting stipulated that faculty must “research and participate in professional development activities to stay current in the field of [discipline].” Finally, Annie, a faculty developer at MWCC, was the only other source in our dataset to articulate the importance of faculty learning through research and disciplinary engagement. Annie explicitly stated: “I want [my colleagues] to continuously improv[e] … to know that education is evolving … be interested in educational research, growing with the times … staying up with their understanding of their field … knowing you always have room to grow.” 
In sum, all the data held that faculty learning was fundamental in providing students quality learning experiences, but there was a divergence in terms of how community college faculty were expected to go about the task of providing quality teaching. A majority equated quality teaching with a faculty member’s technological, managerial, and instructional skills, while a small portion of our data suggested that quality teaching hinged on faculty members’ continuous disciplinary learning either through reading recently published work or conducting small-scale research. The tensions within this finding align with previous work concerning the framing, or we suggest the limiting, of teaching and learning within this sector (Brint & Karabel, 1989; Rhoades, 2011). Specifically, we contend that the instrumental emphasis on technical acumen has implications for the teaching and learning experienced by students and faculty in the community college sector – a consideration we return to in our discussion. However, next, we describe how community college faculty – as generous educators – must also support students by serving as institutional agents. 
Serving as institutional agents 
All of our data sources held that community college faculty – as generous educators – should support students by serving as institutional agents, “high-status, non-kin, agents who occupy relatively high positions in the multiple dimensional stratification system, and who are well positioned to provide key forms of social and institutional support” (Stanton-Salazar, 2011, p. 1066). Like the previous finding concerning quality teaching, we identified two stances as to how faculty should enact this responsibility. All administrators agreed that faculty should use organizationally-prescribed systems and tools (e.g., intrusive advising) to support students. Meanwhile, all faculty, except one, asserted that as institutional agents, they should get to know, empathize, and be prepared to directly support students. 

A unanimous administrator view 
All the administrators in our study expected faculty to use organizational systems to manage and support students and their success. These systems included early alert, Guided Pathways, and web-based dashboards that tracked certain student metrics. Speaking to this expectation, Amanda listed several technological platforms that MCC had recently purchased and described how important it was for faculty to fully adopt these systems. In particular, she praised the value of one system’s ability to track student challenges but lamented how the effectiveness of this system hinged on faculty compliance, saying: 
the one thing that we [administrators] struggle with, I think, for student support is how we throw a safety net under those students who are slipping. Right now, it’s purely faculty-driven or student driven. If a student steps up and says I’m struggling, they reach out to our academic coaches … otherwise, it’s on the faculty member to put in an alert. 

Indeed, Amanda belabored that early alert systems are key strategies faculty can use to enhance student support and success, and she shared with us her hopes that MCC would buy a system intended to “detect dropouts,” which would also require faculty data entry. At SWCC, Maricela noted that administrators strongly encouraged faculty to use an intrusive advising system. Maricela went on to note that most faculty she knew complied with this administrative request, even though they doubted the system’s effectiveness. Similarly, Annie explained that MCC’s administration habitually adopted new technologies and then mandated that faculty use them to improve student success. Annie recalled a time when the college prepopulated all courses with a mandatory set of modules without letting faculty or students know beforehand. According to administrators, these modules featured useful information about the campus’s Guided Pathways and advising systems. However, Annie explained that faculty viewed this action as an encroachment of their educational space and that these modules confused students. Administrators like Gregory noted that even if the college’s prescribed technologies were a bit clunky, they relieved faculty of additional labor. 

The near unanimous faculty view 
Although they recognized the well-intentioned premise of these various technocratic systems, none of the faculty members, save one, believed technologically-enhanced advising and support systems aligned with student needs or viewed them as student friendly. Dean shared that his college’sapproach to early alert advising forced faculty to report midterm exam grades in ways that undermined his student-centered evaluative system. Dean noted that his previous informal midterm evaluation was more developmental, whereas the formal early alert system created more work for him and unnecessarily concerned his students. Speaking passionately, Dean pointed to a wall covered with teaching awards and thank you notes from former students as evidence of his commitment and efficacy as a teacher. Indeed, when faculty described acting as institutional agents, they emphasized building relationships with students, understanding the college and surrounding community, especially the community’s history and resources, and working with students in relational ways. 
Showcasing this relational approach, faculty at SWCC and MCC often discussed the importance of understanding students’ familial obligations, transportation needs, and work duties, as these arrangements impact students’ personhood and educational experiences. For example, Rachel spoke at length of the kinds of supports, including transportation, book loans, and food pantries, that her talented and motivated students needed to succeed. She also described various ways that she and her colleagues organized to obtain such resources. Furthermore, Sarah, a STEM faculty member at MCC, emphasized the need to identify and hire faculty willing and able to recognize the distinctive sociohistorical context of MCC and of the surrounding area. Explaining that a substantial percentage of MCC’s students identify as Native American or Latinx and live in economically poor distant areas – places suffering from vestiges of colonial and neocolonial policies (e.g., inadequate housing and limited transportation) – Sarah described how she expected her faculty colleagues to respond: 
we spend a lot of time with new faculty … I remember one faculty member said, ‘I’ve got a student that says ‘she’s gotta miss this exam because her daughters got a dental appointment that she can’t miss, Why in the world can’tshe re-schedule it?!’ Isaid, ‘Well, is the student [Native American]?’ She goes, ‘Yeah’ and I said, ‘Because she has to use Indian Health Services and if she misses her appointment, it’s going be months before she gets back in!’ 
Her comments make clear her expectation that faculty support students by providing them accommodations, a point she reinforced when stating: 
If you’re unable to make … minimal accommodations, [the students] don’t last long here, honestly … They decide this is not the place for them, and they leave. It’s one of the things that when we interview faculty to hire them, especially if they’re coming in from an area not like this … I’ve been on committees that have not hired the on-paper, most-qualified candidate because we didn’t think personality-wise, that they’d be able to stand it here. 

Like Sarah, Gabrielle talked about serving as a resource to students by holistically accounting for their living conditions and needs, not by using mandated tracking systems. Of this, she said, “It wasn’t uncommon for me to, beyond office hours, have conversations with students on the phone at all kinds of times during the day and the evening, on the weekends” When asked if the college explicitly expected such interactions of faculty, Gabrielle clarified: 
people just kind of do that, and it’s kind of implicitly expected that faculty do that … it’s never explicitly stated in your contract, right? … the advising piece and dealing with student issues … it’s part of what you do when you care about students … So, like, I’d be referring students to support agencies … a lot of connecting students and that wasn’t ever an expectation that’s given to you. It’s just something … you end up doing. 
To offer one final example, Annie, drawing from her experience as a faculty developer, described how an instructor complained about a “problem student,” and in an emotional exchange, she relayed: 
You are calling her a problem student. But, she is probably a student with a lot of problems … You’re looking at her like she can’t get her act together … She is a student who is still enrolled in your class. Do something about her problems. Let go of your anger. Help her solve her problems. 
Annie’s comment reflects the overarching faculty perspective; students benefit when faculty invest time in knowing them, their community, and available resources, and while technocratic systems may be helpful, they cannot replace the relational work of an educator. 

Discussion 
We set out to understand the expectations assigned to and taken up by community college faculty and the extent to which these expectations aligned or diverged across faculty, administrators, and organizational documents. As mentioned earlier, from the start of this study, we assumed that the careers of community college faculty may be more complex and multifaceted than commonly portrayed. In terms of our first question, we found that the overriding expectation of community college faculty was that of a generous educator, who invests in developing their teaching and supporting students. Beneath this sensible and seemingly consistent finding, however, we noticed critical notes of discord concerning how faculty should implement these responsibilities. We discuss our findings and recommendations below. 
The limited conception of quality teaching in community colleges 
As a reminder, most participants held that investing in quality teaching includes learning about new technologies, instructional strategies, and classroom management. Also, this group clearly agreed that time spent on research-related activities had little, if any, place in community colleges and that such activities did not translate to quality teaching — a view that has been documented in previous research (Baker, Terosky, & Martinez, 2017; Prager, 2003). Only a few participants stressed that in addition to enhancing one’s technical skills, quality teaching also requires faculty to continue learning through research-related activities and other disciplinary explorations. With this, it is important to note that those with this minority view did not approach research in the ways many of their colleagues at research universities might. Instead, they valued updating their disciplinary knowledge by reading new articles, attending conferences, and, sometimes, by deploying action-based research in their classes to improve their teaching and students’ learning experiences. 
These conflicting views are not entirely surprising. Workplace researchers often find that there are multiple interpretations of organizational mission and expectations (Cawyer & Friedrich, 1998). Additionally, in the context of U.S. higher education, there is a long-running tension concerning how teaching and learning should be fulfilled at different institutional types. Indeed, our finding raises questions as to whether community college leaders view faculty as disciplinary experts or as mere conveyors of content. Our finding also raises questions about how community college faculty view themselves and their colleagues. Thus, before deliberating on what can be made of these divergent expectations, we consider why the parameters of teaching and learning in this sector have been so narrowly and instrumentally defined. 

We argue that such an instrumental framing or limiting of faculty work in this sector reflects a skepticism of community college faculty members’ status as academic professionals or as intellectuals. In one study, Gonzales and Terosky (2016) interviewed community college professors who commented on the rampant elitism in academia and, in particular, on how some often read their employment within a community college, rather than at a research university, as an indication of their inability, or failure, to “make it” in academe. In connection with Gonzales and Terosky’s earlier work, this study also suggests an internalized elitism within academia, which unfairly defines a faculty members’ intellectual potential in relation to their institutional affiliation. 
Relatedly, our findings resonate with Rhoades’s(1998, 2011) depiction of faculty as managed professionals, particularly his recent study on the jurisdiction of teaching in the context of pervasive technology. In short, Rhoades explored how faculty and managerial professionals, like program managers, understood faculty authority over educational space, which is basically any medium where teaching and learning takes place (e.g., learning management systems). After analyzing sources representing both faculty and managerial views, Rhoades (2011) argued: 
negotiations [between faculty and management] have profound implications for the place of professors in the educational spaces of colleges and universities … [some of the discourse] is moving professors off center stage, moving them from playing the leading role in a part that includes long soliloquies to the margins of the educational enterprise, with smaller, more limited parts in the production of instruction and learning. (p. 94) 
Although our study was not focused on the intersection of faculty and technology, our data still suggest that faculty were expected to use or, better said, entrust much of their teaching and student support to technology (e.g., early-alert and dashboards). 
Similar to Rhoades, we also found that most participants did not equate community college faculty members’ expertise as central to their teaching or student learning. For example, most participants seemed to frame community college teaching with the ungirding assumption that academic content is definitive and stable, not requiring updating, unlearning, or reimagining. From this instrumental perspective, faculty merely convey rather than contest or even update knowledge. With such instrumentality prescribed by nearly all participants, including both administrators and faculty, community colleges students likely do not have access to the most current disciplinary knowledge. Furthermore, given the demographics of community college students, we are concerned that this instrumental framing of teaching and learning is implicitly raced, classed, and otherwise marked with marginality, as it limits what is expected of both faculty and students. For this reason especially, it is crucial that community colleges broaden their notions about faculty teaching and learning as well as what counts as investments in quality teaching. To consider how community colleges might approach this reconceptualization, we draw on language and strategies from recent empirical scholarship. 

Recommendations 
According to Neumann (2009), both instrumental and scholarly learning are critical to faculty vitality and, ultimately, to their ability to carry out their work. Neumann explained that when faculty engage in instrumental learning, they learn about systems, strategies, policies, and practices that allow them to perform their work. As already noted, the vast majority of participants exclusively favored instrumental learning, which, while important, has little to do with professors’ academic subject matter. In contrast, faculty engage in scholarly learning when they deepen, broaden, challenge, and, sometimes, revise their disciplinary knowledge base. Although both types of learning feed professors’ continual development and, thus, their teaching, Neumann (2009) observed that organizational discourse, priority setting, and decision-making rarely center scholarly learning – a point substantiated by our findings. 
We encourage community colleges to recognize and distinguish the value of both instrumental and scholarly learning as crucial ingredients for quality teaching and encourage faculty to pursue a mix of both opportunities. Community college administrators such as deans and chief academic officers must be willing to devise systems and evaluation policies that recognize and value faculty participation across all types of learning. In other words, not only should community colleges expand how they talk about and advocate for faculty learning related to quality teaching, but they must also recognize and allocate resources to these different learning opportunities. 
In offering this recommendation, we realize that most community colleges operate with a shortage of resources and that expecting part-time faculty to engage in such a mix of learning opportunities may seem unrealistic, or even manipulative, particularly if colleges connect resources, recognition, and future professional development (e.g., promotion and permanent contracts) to these very learning opportunities. Thus, we strongly urge administrators to consider their college’s current assets in relation to this recommendation, using Park, Braxton, and Lyken-Segosebe’s(2015) typology. Specifically, Park et al. conducted a national study about the scholarly engagement of community college faculty, categorizing faculty into one of three groups: Immersed Scholars, Scholars of Dissemination,or Scholars of Pedagogical Practice. Accordingly, Immersed Scholars are involved in “conducting seminars for lay people and local high schools, as well as presenting papers at a scholarly meeting,” while Scholars of Dissemination “share their knowledge and research with a broader community … [by] developing a collection of teaching resource materials, lecturing in a colleague’s class, and developing new processes for dealing with practice” (Park et al., 2015, p. 16). Lastly, Scholars of Pedagogical Practice are “more heavily involved in … developing examples to help students learn, experimenting with new teaching methods, and creating new approaches for class-management and examination practices” (Park et al., 2015,p. 17). In these ways, Scholars of Pedagogical Practice most closely conform to the instrumental framing of teaching and learning shared among nearly all participants. 
As a national-level study, Park et al. (2015) could not provide campus-level data; however, their findings implied that community college campuses likely employ a few people in each category. Thus, community colleges may consider using Park et al.’s framework to recognize assets on their campuses. After identifying faculty within these various categories, colleges could invite faculty to provide one-on-one or group mentoring, workshops, or short webinars based on their different areas of expertise. Rather than hiring additional personnel to fulfill such roles and needs, community colleges could award sabbaticals or reduced teaching loads to full-time faculty who assist with this necessary work. Alternatively, we suggest that community colleges extend full-time appointments to interested part-time faculty if they assume responsibilities for faculty professional development in addition to their teaching assignments. Such sabbaticals and/or re-appointments act as one possible way to counter the well-cited ill-effects of contingency, including the precarious nature of contingent employment and the limited opportunities available to adjuncts’ for meaningful campus involvement. To conclude, we stress that as community colleges expand how they define, think, and, more so, how they valorize quality teaching, they must also carefully consider the significant differences between the working conditions of full-time permanent faculty and those of part-time contingent faculty. With this in mind, colleges should offer all professional development and learning opportunities across various platforms (e.g., in-person workshops, asynchronous online formats, and audiovisual recordings). 
The bureaucratization of institutional agency in community colleges 
All participants stressed the importance of community college faculty learning about students and their backgrounds, as well as of supporting students in a variety of ways. Amid this seeming consensus, however, we still noticed distinct stances in how faculty should serve as institutional agents. Generally, administrators privileged faculty’s use of technical systems to log, track, and refer out student challenges, while faculty, both those full-time and part-time employed, typically emphasized a relational approach to institutional agency. Noting this pronounced difference between data sources, we argue that administrators sought to bureaucratize the care expected of faculty in their role as institutional agents. 

Administrators’ deep faith in the reliable performance of technological systems and related tools is not necessarily unusual. Like most organizations, community colleges favor the stability and standardization gained through bureaucracy over the nuance and potential messiness of human relationships (Bierema, 2009; Gonzales & Ayers, 2018). Read generously, this preference for bureaucracy may stem from its promise to deliver a consistency uneasily reproduced by humans, as well as from administrators’ well-based intentions to buffer faculty from daunting workloads and the adverse tolls of emotional labor. However, a more critical read of this administrative preference for bureaucracy suggests that again managerial professionals prefer to move faculty off center-stage in favor of technology and other bureaucratic systems. In this way, administrators presume that if faculty input information (e.g., trustworthy data) into prescribed systems, student support can be made more reliable and, thus, student success more likely. 
Consistent with most faculty in this study, we likewise contend that bureaucratic systems such as early-alert and online dashboards are no substitute for holistic and relational support. Furthermore, as most of faculty participants indicated, they often gain nuanced knowledge about their students – data not easily plugged into or entrusted to a dashboard. Plainly, while administrators generally assumed that technocratic systems such as intrusive advising technologies advanced student success, faculty witnessed students’ daily trials and tribulations and supported them through direct and immediate action. For example, faculty shared with us their dogged efforts at resolving students’ transportation issues and at advising students on financial aid. Gabriella, Sarah, and Rachel even noted how on the weekends they sometimes chatted with students over personal cellphones and/or text messages. 
It bears emphasizing, however, that faculty in this study were clear that their personal and direct approach to student advocacy was not a codified or formal expectation, but one of their own making. It is also important to note that these faculty did not position themselves as heroes. Rather, they recognized the varied ways their students’ significant intellectual skills and potential were often hindered by serious challenges, which demanded immediate support. Indeed, when asked what they most needed to better support students, faculty participants requested food pantries, transportation, and micro-loans for textbooks. Thus, when administrators expected faculty to use intrusive advising dashboards and online tools to serve as institutional agents without investing in bus systems, food pantries, housing options, or micro-loans, faculty, including both those part-time and full-time appointed, resorted to caring and advocating for students in more personalized ways. 
The expectation that faculty use technocratic systems to streamline student support is additional evidence that community college faculty embody managed professionals. In fact, our analysis illuminates new ways of thinking about the management of community college faculty. To date, most research concerning the idea of managed professionals has examined the upending of instruction and research due to management’s control of resources and faculty’s reduced power (Rhoades, 1998), which we highlighted earlier. However, we argue that community college faculty members’ commitment – their empathy, their service, and their generosity – is another potential area that is being managed and an area for future research. In closing, although we must be cautious of exploiting faculty members’ commitment to care for students (Gonzales & Ayers, 2018), we recognize that this very relational aspect of the job is what many, although not all, community college faculty most enjoy in their work (Cohen et al., 2013). For this reason, community colleges must consider how faculty members’ support of students can be recognized and compensated as an integral part of their work. 

Recommendations 
Based on our findings, we urge that campus leaders and faculty work together to consider what student supports should be handled through systems like online dashboards and intrusive advising and what aspects of support should be handled by faculty. Several faculty critiqued administrators for divesting in particular systems and investing in others that did not align with student needs. However, together, administrators and faculty may design a smarter and more flexible system for supporting students, and one that allows faculty members’ student support efforts to be recognized. In terms of process, community colleges might consider appointing faculty student advocates and factoring such work into faculty workload. Again, this could be an opportunity to bring part-time faculty who are already engaging in intense service to full-time status for extended periods of time. 

Conclusion 
When exploring community college faculty work expectations, we found substantial conceptual consensus across faculty, administrators, and organizational documents. Indeed, all expected community college faculty, both those part-time and full-time employed, to act as generous educators by investing in quality teaching and supporting students as institutional agents. However, upon closer analysis, we uncovered discrepant ideas as to how faculty should fulfill these responsibilities. Specifically, our findings revealed how the generosity expected of community college faculty was managed in various ways. We hope our work supports campus leaders, faculty, and faculty development professionals in reframing the expectations assigned and assumed by community college faculty in ways that foster the richest possibilities for teaching and learning for all. 

Note 
1. American Association of University Professors (2014) defines contingent faculty as non-tenure track, part-and full-time faculty. Accordingly, this term includes adjuncts, who generally are paid per-course or hourly, and full-time, non-tenure-track faculty, who earn a salary. In this paper, we use contingent faculty to refer to adjuncts or part-time employed faculty. 

References 
Abelman, R., & Dalessandro, A. (2008). The institutional vision of community colleges: Assessing style as well as substance. Community College Review, 35(4), 306–335. doi:10.1177/0091552108315604 <BR>
American Association of University Professor, Joint Subcommittee of the Association’s Committee on Contingent Faculty and the Profession. (2014). Contingent appointments and the academic profession. Retrieved from https:// <BR>www.aaup.org/report/contingent-appointments-and-academic-profession <BR>
Austin, A. E., & McDaniels, M. (2006). Using doctoral education to prepare faculty to work within Boyer’s four domains of scholarship. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2006(129), 51–65. doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1536-075X <BR>Ayers, D. F. (2015). Credentialing structures, pedagogies, practices, and curriculum goals: Trajectories of change in community college mission statements. Community College Review, 43(2), 191–214. doi:10.1177/0091552115569847 <BR>Baker, V. L., Terosky, A. L., & Martinez, E. (2017). Special issue: Faculty members’ scholarly learning across institutional types. ASHE Higher Education Report, 43(2), 1–152. doi:10.1002/aehe.20118 <BR>Barnes, B. J., Williams, E. A., & Archer, S. A. (2010). Characteristics that matter most: Doctoral students’ perceptions of positive and negative advisor attributes. NACADA Journal, 30(1), 34–46. doi:10.12930/0271-9517-30.1.34 <BR>Bierema, L. L. (2009). Critiquing human resource development’s dominant masculine rationality and evaluating its 
impact. Human Resource Development Review, 8(1), 68–96. doi:10.1177/1534484308330020 <BR>Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (1976). Schooling in capitalist America. New York, NY: Basic Books. Boyer, E. L. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities of the professoriate. Lawrenceville, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. Braxton, J. M., Doyle, W. R., & Lyken-Segosebe, D. (2015). Tweaking the culture of the community college. New Directions for Community Colleges, (2015(171), 77–85. doi:10.1002/cc.20156 <BR>Brint, S., & Karabel, J. (1989). The diverted dream: Community colleges and the promise of educational opportunity in America, 1900–1985. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Burns, K. (2017). Community college faculty as pedagogical innovators: How the scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) stimulates innovation in the classroom. Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 41(3), 153–167. doi:10.1080/10668926.2016.1168327 <BR>
Cawyer, C. S., & Friedrich, G. W. (1998). Organizational socialization: Processes for new communication faculty. Communication Education, 47(3), 234–245. doi:10.1080/03634529809379128 <BR>
Cejda, B. D., & Hensel, N. (2009). Undergraduate research in community colleges. Undergraduate research at community colleges. Council on Undergraduate Research. Retrieved from https://www.cur.org/assets/1/7/ <BR>Undergraduate_Research_at_Community_Colleges_-_Full_Text_-_Final.pdf <BR>
Center for Community College Student Engagement (2014). Contingent commitments: Bringing part-time faculty into focus (A special report from the Center for Community College Student Engagement). Austin: The University of Texas at Austin, Program in Higher Education Leadership. Retrieved from http://www.ccsse.org/docs/PTF_Special_ <BR>Report.pdf <BR>
Chen, K. (2018). Capturing organizational as actors. In C. Jerolmack & S. Khan (Eds.), Approaches to ethnography (pp. 31–60). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Clark, B. (1978). Academic differentiation in national systems of higher education. Comparative Education Review, 22 (2), 242–258. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/1187674 <BR>
Cohen, A., Brawer, F., & Kisker, C. (2013). The American community college (6th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Cox, R. D. (2010). The college fear factor: How students and professors misunderstand one another. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Dallimore, E. J. (2003). Memorable messages as discursive formations: The gendered socialization of new university faculty. Women’s Studies in Communication, 26(2), 214–265. doi:10.1080/07491409.2003.10162460 <BR>
Denzin, N. K. (2017). Critical qualitative inquiry. Qualitative Inquiry, 23(1), 8–16. doi:10.1177/1077800416681864 <BR>
Evergreen, S. D. H. (2018). Presenting data effectively: Communicating your findings for maximum impact (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Filstad, C. (2004). How newcomers use role models in organizational socialization. Journal of Workplace Learning, 16 (7), 396–409. doi:10.1108/13665620410558297 <BR>
Finley, D., & Kinslow, S. L. (2016). Faculty talk about teaching at the community college. Oxford Handbooks Online. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935291.013.47 <BR>
Gappa, J. M., & Leslie, D. W. (1993). The invisible faculty. Improving the status of part-timers in higher education. Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Inc. 
Gardner, S. K. (Ed.). (2010). On becoming a scholar: Socialization and development in doctoral education. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing, LCC. 
Garza-Mitchell, R. L. (2009). Online education and organizational change. Community College Review, 37(1), 81–101. doi:10.1177/0091552109338731 <BR>
Gibson, J. R., & Murray, J. P. (2009). Maneuvering the role as a community college artist-educator: Scholarship assessed. Community College Review, 36(4), 326–346. doi:10.1177/0091552109332486 <BR>
Goldrick-Rab, S. (2016). Paying the price: College costs, financial aid, and the betrayal of the American dream. Chicago, 
IL: The University of Chicago Press. Gonzales, L. D. (2013). Faculty sensemaking and mission creep: Interrogating institutionalized ways of knowing and doing legitimacy. The Review of Higher Education, 36(2), 179–209. doi:10.1353/rhe.2013.0000 <BR>Gonzales, L. D. (2014). Framing faculty agency inside striving universities: An application of Bourdieu’s theory of practice. The Journal of Higher Education, 85(2), 193–218. doi:10.1080/00221546.2014.11777324 <BR>
Gonzales, L. D., & Ayers, D. F. (2018). The convergence of institutional logics on the community college sector and the normalization of emotional labor: A new theoretical approach for considering the community college faculty labor expectations. The Review of Higher Education, 41(3), 455–478. doi:10.1353/rhe.2018.0015 <BR>
Gonzales, L. D., & Terosky, A. L. (2016). From the faculty perspective: Defining, earning, and maintaining legitimacy across academia. Teachers College Record, 118(7), 1–44. Retrieved from: http://www.tcrecord.org/Content.asp? <BR>ContentId=20805 <BR>
Grubb, W. N., & Worthen, H. (1999). Honored but invisible: An inside look at teaching in community colleges. New York, NY: Routledge. Gumport, P. J. (2003). The demand-response scenario: Perspectives of community college presidents. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 586(1), 38–61. doi:10.1177/0002716202250210 <BR>Haviland, D., Ortiz, A. M., & Henriques, L. (2017). Shaping your career: A guide for early career faculty. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing, LLC. Hermanowicz, J. C. (2011). The American academic profession: Transformation in contemporary higher education. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Higher Learning Commission. (2019). Determining qualified faculty. Retrieved from https://www.hlcommission.org/ <BR>Publications/determining-qualified-faculty.html <BR>Jaeger, A. J., & Eagan, J. M. K. (2009). Unintended consequences: Examining the effect of part-time faculty members on associate’s degree completion. Community College Review, 36(3), 167–194. doi:10.1177/0091552108327070 <BR>

S. AGUILAR-SMITH AND L. D. GONZALES 
Jenkins, D., & Cho, S. (2013). Get with the program … and finish it: Building guided pathways to accelerate student completion. New Directions for Community Colleges, (2013(164), 27–35. doi:10.1002/cc.20078 <BR>
Kezar, A. J., & Maxey, D. (2014). Faculty matter: So why doesn’t everyone think so? Thought & Action,29–44. Retrieved from http://www.nea.org/assets/docs/HE/e-Kezar.pdf <BR>
Lester, J. (2008). Performing gender in the workplace: Gender socialization, power, and identity among women faculty members. Community College Review, 35(4), 277–305. doi:10.1177/0091552108314756 <BR>
Lester, J. (2009). <BR>Not your child’s playground: Workplace bullying among community college faculty. Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 33(5), 444–462. doi:10.1080/10668920902728394 <BR>
Levin, J. S., Walker, L., Haberler, Z., & Jackson-Boothby, A. (2013). The divided self: The double consciousness of faculty of color in community colleges. Community College Review, 41(4), 311–329. doi:10.1177/0091552113504454 <BR>
Ma, J., & Baum, S. (2016). Trends in community colleges: Enrollment, prices, student debt, and completion (research brief). Retrieved from College Board website: https://trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/trends-in<BR>community-colleges-research-brief.pdf <BR>
Martinez, E. (2018). Changes, challenges, and opportunities for student services at one baccalaureate degree–Granting community college. Community College Review, 46(1), 82–103. doi:10.1177/0091552117744049 <BR>
Morphew, C. C., & Hartley, M. (2006). Mission statements: A thematic analysis of rhetoric across institutional type. The Journal of Higher Education, 77(3), 456–471. Retrieved from https://repository.upenn.edu/gse_pubs/13 <BR>
National Center for Education Statistics. (2017). Number of faculty in degree-granting postsecondary institutions, by employment status, sex, control, and level of institution: Selected years, fall 1970 through fall 2016 [Data file]. Retrieved from https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d17/tables/dt17_315.10.asp <BR>
Neumann, A. (2009). Professing to learn: Creating tenured lives and careers in the American research university. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Palmer, J. C. (2015). Scholarship and the professional identity of community college faculty members: Scholarship and the professional identity. New Directions for Community Colleges, (2015(171), 37–48. doi:10.1002/cc.20153 <BR>
Park, T. J., Braxton, J. M., & Lyken-Segosebe, D. (2015). Types of faculty scholars in community colleges. New Directions for Community Colleges, (2015,15–19. doi:10.1002/cc.20151 <BR>
Phelan, D. J. (2014). The clear and present funding crisis in community colleges. New Directions for Community Colleges, (2014(168), 5–16. doi:10.1002/cc.20116 <BR>
Prager, C. (2003). Scholarship matters. Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 27, 579–592. doi:10.1080/ <BR>713838216 <BR>
Rhoades, G. (1998). Managed professionals: Unionized faculty and restructuring academic labor. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Rhoades, G. (2011). Whose educational space? Negotiating professional jurisdiction in the high-tech academy. In 
J. C. Hermanowicz (Ed.), The American academic profession—Transformation in contemporary higher education (pp. 92–110). Baltimore, ML: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Rhoades, G. (2015, April). Bread and roses, and quality too: A new faculty majority negotiating the new academy. Paper presented at National Center for the Study of Collective Bargaining in Higher Education and the Professions: Thinking about Tomorrow Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations in Higher Education, New York City, NY. Retrieved from https://thekeep.eiu.edu/jcba/vol0/iss10/ <BR>
Rhoades, G. (2017). Bread and roses, and quality too? A new faculty majority negotiating the new academy. The Journal of Higher Education, 88(5), 645–671. doi:10.1080/00221546.2016.1257310 <BR>
Romano, R. M., & Palmer, J. C. (2016). The community college and the business cycle. Change: the Magazine of Higher Learning, 48(5), 52–57. doi:10.1080/00091383.2016.1227676 <BR>
Savoy, J., & Hill, L. (2018). The career pathways of community college STEM faculty: Results of the CIRTL includes pilot study. Wisconsin Center for Education Research. Retrieved from https://cirtlincludes.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/ <BR>12/CIRTL_INCLUDES_CC_Pathways_REPORT.pdf <BR>
Sellberg, C., & Lindblom, J. (2014). Comparing methods for workplace studies: A theoretical and empirical analysis. Cognition, Technology & Work, 16(4), 467–486. doi:10.1007/s10111-014-0273-3 <BR>
Shapiro, D., Dundar, A., Huie, F., Wakhungu, P., Yuan, X., Nathan, A., & Hwang, Y. A. (2017, April). Completing college: A national view of student attainment rates by race and ethnicity – Fall 2010 Cohort (Signature Report No. 12b). Herndon, VA: National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. Retrieved from https://nscresearchcenter. <BR>org/signaturereport12-supplement-2/ <BR>
Sperling, C. B. (2003). How community colleges understand the scholarship of teaching and learning. Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 27(7), 593–601. doi:10.1080/713838214 <BR>
Stanton-Salazar, R. D. (2011). A social capital framework for the study of institutional agents and their role in the empowerment of low-status students and youth. Youth & Society, 43(3), 1066–1109. doi:10.1177/ <BR>0044118X10382877 <BR>
Stensaker, B. (2015). Organizational identity as a concept for understanding university dynamics. Higher Education, 69 (1), 103–115. doi:10.1007/s10734-014-9763-8 <BR>

Street, S., Maisto, M., Merves, E., & Rhoades, G. (2012). Who is professor “staff” and how can this person teach so many classes. Center for the Future of Higher Education, 2, 1–22. Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/ <BR>sites/default/server_files/files/profstaff(2).pdf <BR>
Terosky, A. L., & Gonzales, L. D. (2016). Re-envisioned contributions: Experiences of faculty employed at institutional types that differ from their original aspirations. The Review of Higher Education, 39(2), 241–268. doi:10.1353/ <BR>rhe.2016.0005 <BR>
Thirolf, <BR>K. <BR>Q. <BR>(2017). Reconceptualizing a more inclusive faculty engagement model: Including and engaging part-time faculty at community colleges. Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 41(4–5), 303–310. doi:10.1080/ <BR>10668926.2016.1251357 <BR>
Tierney, W. G., & Bensimon, E. M. (1996). Promotion and tenure: Community and socialization in academe. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Trowler, P., & Knight, P. T. (2000). Coming to know in higher education: Theorising faculty entry to new work contexts. Higher Education Research & Development, 19(1), 27–42. doi:10.1080/07294360050020453 <BR>
Turner, C. S. V. (2002). Diversifying the faculty: A guidebook for search committees. Association of American Colleges and Universities. Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED465359 <BR>
Twombly, S., & Townsend, B. K. (2008). Community college faculty what we know and need to know. Community College Review, 36(1), 5–24. doi:10.1177/0091552108319538 <BR>
Twombly, S. B. (2005). Values, policies, and practices affecting the hiring process for full-time arts and sciences faculty in community colleges. Journal of Higher Education, 76(4), 423–447. doi:10.1353/jhe.2005.0032 <BR>
U.S. Governmental Accountability Office. (2017). Contingent workforce: Size, characteristics, compensation, and work experiences of adjunct and other non-tenure-track faculty (GAO-18-49). Retrieved from https://www.gao.gov/assets/ <BR>690/687871.pdf <BR>
Varney, J. (2007). Intrusive advising. Academic Advising Today, 30(3). Retrieved from https://www.nacada.ksu.edu/ <BR>Resources/Academic-Advising-Today/View-Articles/Intrusive-Advising.aspx <BR>
Wagoner, R. L. (2019). Ethics of employment: The new adjunct majority. New Directions in Community Colleges, 2019 (185), 89–96. doi:10.1002/cc.20341 <BR>
Ward, K., & Wolf-Wendel, L. (2017). “Good” places to work: Women faculty, community colleges, academic work, and family integration. New Directions for Community Colleges, 2017(179), 47–58. doi:10.1002/cc.20261 <BR>
Yarnall, L. (2014). Meeting 2020 workforce goals: The role of industry–College collaboration and goals for instructional design. Community College Journal of Research and Practice, 38(2–3), 250–260. doi:10.1080/ <BR>10668926.2014.851976 <BR>

S. AGUILAR-SMITH AND L. D. GONZALES 
Appendix A. 
Institutional Profiles for Each Community College 
MWCC  MCC  SWCC  
Student Demographics  
Total Enrollment  12,882  11,599  28,846  
Percent Full-Time  37  35  30  
Percent Pell-Eligible  42  61  77  
Percent First-Generation  n/a  n/a  46  
Racial/Ethnic Demographics  
White  69  40  7  
Black/African American  9  1  2  
Hispanic/Latino  8  18  85  
Asian  3  1  1  
American Indian/Alaskan Native  1  34  0  
Two or More Races/Other  11  6  4  
Student Gender Breakdown (Percent Female)  54  65  57  
Average Student Age  n/a  n/a  22  
Percent 24 and Under  71  49  77  
Percent 25 and Over  29  51  23  
Student-to-Faculty Ratio  12:1  17:1  25:1  
Faculty Demographics  
Total Number  1,496  447  1,317  
Full-Time  191  178  460  
Part-Time  1,305  269  857  
Racial/Ethnic Demographics  
White  n/a  n/a  31.4  
Black/African American  n/a  n/a  3.4  
Hispanic/Latino  n/a  n/a  63.2  
Asian  n/a  n/a  2.0  
Total Gender Breakdown (Percent Female)  n/a  n/a  49  

Note. Data obtained from College Navigator ICES National Center for Education Statistics (2017) and institutional data publicly available on college’s websites. 


